Okay, go ahead.
They're about to do something.
They're about to do something really...
There's no guy's intention to burn the books like the author.
Evil.
I mean, you can say the word evil or nasty.
I think you can maybe use a stronger word than that.
Evil.
I don't want to put words in there.
No, no, no.
They want, in a way, to erase the memory.
So they target the...
the places, the institutions where the memory is kept.
But let us be wise and use this tragic experience to think about the following.
there is no way that such an attack and such a destruction can be fruitful because if you have in your mind several verses of your favorite poet and if all the books of that poet
by some miracle disappear by some catastrophe by some natural catastrophe that miracle that's the other way you will definitely because you are passionately involved with the lyrics you love teach your little kids
So we're going back to the oral tradition then, is what you're saying.
It's almost homeric in a way, isn't it?
Yes.
So they've forced you to return to before the age of books and printing.
You know the book, Fahrenheit 451, where they memorize the scriptures so they can say... You will do the same thing.
You know, if you are in jeopardy.
The books in our minds, we know in the minds.
The books in our minds are the part of our life.
We're not here to eat, we're just having a couple of years.
It's very hard to destroy what you really love and want.
What you really love and cherish.
Why you read a book?
You want to open yourself, your mind to some kind of a different experience.
But, uh...
You are the one discovering these words that does not have the meaning by themselves.
Isn't it so?
You cannot understand the book if it's written on a foreign language, I mean language that you don't know.
Do you enjoy, no, reading?
Yes.
You are enjoying, but you open your mind to a new perspective, to new visions, to new fiction.
the new virtual reality.
You know, you can destroy the books better.
You know what me and my wife did?
How I sing a lullaby to my wife.
Because lullaby, lullaby is to go to sleep.
I'm just saying it from the tape so I can understand it when I come to... We have lots of useless time because there is no electricity and you have to be very careful where to put the oil.
You don't mind if I unbutton my shirt there.
in our meal or spend it on the light.
So we got in bed very early.
And we've been sick of the sleeping, you know.
So we were talking.
What we did?
We recite all the songs that we ever heard.
We sing to each other, different kind of a tune.
Then we repeat it again.
Then we sing.
summarize and repeating all the books that we have read.
Then we reread the library, the home library that we have.
And then we do it again and again and again.
In order to keep ourselves busy, to provoke a fine feeling, a good vibration, and we stop
doing this ritual of falling asleep because if I fall asleep first if I fall asleep I start snoring I developed a habit to sleep my wife is going to sleep first so I can easily fall asleep and snore but she sleeps very deeply
And I start this ritual of recollecting the memory, what we read, what we've gone through, where have we been, all these things endlessly.
Because my wife at a certain point says, oh please shut up, you are repeating yourself.
You know, it practically means I got out of the tunes.
Needless to tell you that I recollect all the Beatles tunes, all the Rolling Stones tunes.
I mean, I have a specials like Moody Blues, hundreds of thousands of the tunes that I sing to my wife as a lullaby.
So it was interesting to her to get you to sleep.
All after all, I had to go all over again.
And she said, oh, forget it.
You are repeating yourself.
Amazing.
You know, when you do not add the fresh information, the new books that you like to read, you do, you may not have to do what you may not have to do.
You have to recollect it.
to emphasize.
You know, but also to reinforce it in a way.
We are talking about things that keeps us alive.
Alive in a sense that we are alive.
And repetition is one way to do it, of course, is what you're saying, I guess.
Yes.
Definitely.
Now,
I understand that the night that the library burned, there was a chain of people trying to rescue books, and there was a young woman who was shot to death, is that not?
I know, that's a false story.
Aida Buturevich, a colleague of mine, and a good friend of mine, died
while she was returning for home, I think two or three days before the burn-out of my day.
That really didn't happen.
But this story appears as an accident of getting the full information.
The tragic story of Aida Baturi's parents is the following.
His father was so upset.
And so I've talked about my dad that he would also deliberately get himself shot because he lives on the front line and he just breaks and goes to the riverbank practically in the same position as that scene from his movie and goes to Iran shouting to the shotgun so they shook him down because he could not stand it.
Come on, I have to leave.
I'll be there.
I'm sorry I stole him from you.
No, no, it's okay.
I'm going to give you a call, right?
Did you know him when he was on Saturday April?
No.
I met him in Barcelona where we held a conference held by UNESCO on the cooperation on higher education in Bosnia-Segovina.
But I'm amazing.
Amazing personality.
Yeah.
Well, he actually works in the same city that I do, and I've never met him before tonight.
So we're going to talk a little bit.
Absolutely.
That's why it's so important not to lose the name of it.
It's not Garfield yet in Boston, so we have a plenty of time.
I got all right.
How old are you, might I ask?
Yes, you may.
I was born on September 4th, 1956, which practically means I'm 40 years old.
Okay.
So happily married.
Unfortunately, there are the children, but happily married.
We were in the perfect harmony and love with my wife, please.
She's named Marina and... Well...
First time in the United States and... This is the first time he has... First thing to do is... Invitation to the White House.
No one will do it, even my mother.
Did that happen?
Really?
Yeah, that told me... I will show you the photograph.
Have you been... So you've been to the White House or you've been invited to the White House?
I was invited to the White House and meet the first lady.
And have you done this already or is this sport coming?
No, no, I've done it.
Really?
We'll go right here.
Is that right?
Yeah.
It turns out.
I don't think we're going to be able to get a table.
All right.
Well, there's no ball rolling, so we have a view to the...
This action done by Jeff Riespour and Andra Sridermayev, who are a nice northern person, dedicated to this democracy.
He's amazing.
You know, I've spent a couple of hours with him.
Definitely.
I mean, we are inmate connected for almost three years, and this is the first opportunity to meet him, and I'm with Jeff Riesp.
I mean, I'm in his home.
He's dedicated, you know, he's committed to it.
Yes, but those are the kind of intellectuals that really know what's happening.
So, Harvard University Press promises books, I mean, two copies of their current production.
I think I can do something for you with the Library of Congress, by the way.
I was just talking to the Library of Congress, a similar thing, just two days ago.
And also the head of the president of the New York Public Library, Paul McClare, is interested in doing something else off the camera.
Yeah, but, you know, we now have the channel.
Now the important thing is to remember all the people involved in this book business is the list of the duplicates of what's available.
Must be the first step of our agreement because more or less people are collecting books without any clue.
That's right.
So we have at this point maybe 50.
Yeah, 50 tons, definitely.
50 what, I'm sorry?
50 tons of useless material.
Because they're trying to be helpful, but they're not doing anything.
Yeah, it's a problem known in library science as the problem of the white elephant.
What are you going to do with the donation?
And they are giving you stuff that they don't want and that's no good.
Absolutely, so if you are interested in the complete set of the volunteers, I am not faking this in the truth.
I can prove it to you.
If you need the complete set of the annual report of the Hawaii Agricultural Institute from
1904 to 1931, please.
Call me, right?
Just call me.
Oh, if you want the total run of annual reports of the Commonwealth of Australia, meaning all these provinces.
What do these people think that you need?
They think that you just want volumes, but that the content is irrelevant?
That's ridiculous.
That is the way
You know, this is the way how it does operate, that you are not getting into the profession.
So maybe money is what you need, is that right?
Yeah, but you know, money can grow on the tree or the book on the roof.
Yeah, there is money, though.
I like to say, there's money available if it agrees with what they want, you know.
Yeah, but from my experience, doing that work,
The problem is the following one.
From my experience working in the Ministry of Education, the Assistant Minister, it is not money that is so much important.
It is the program and, you know, the public relations and the assessment of this program.
You know, when you hit the target, money, they come one way or another.
You know, he says to go straight here, so we're going to let him pass it.
He said, wave goodbye.
We went out of our way a little bit so I could get him on the way home.
Go ahead, I'm sorry, money.
Money is not a program that you've got a feasible program.
But you know, all the time you are faced with the fact that people are offering the programs that are already good for some other countries, like Burundi, Botswana, Somalia.
They just change the color, but not the content of it.
That is why it's so important that people can pop, can really experience being there, just the smell, just to have a feeling, touch the light.
I don't know, I'm not right about it, it's not right about it.
Did you see the gate there?
It said autos only and then there's a gate.
That doesn't help me then.
All right, I'm sorry, don't worry about it.
Okay, we're on the way.
You can have a cigarette if you like.
So it's practically after four years.
Receive, please.
Got it.
Thank you.
After four years of doing most of the things with books, like immigration books, and doing these things with their post because I'm a professional librarian.
After four years I met this beautiful lady and she presented me a list, first list of the books.
So I definitely said, this is the right thing.
This is the first time that I'm in possibility to pick and choose.
I said, that is how all things are going on.
So right now I'm establishing the Sabre Foundation, or Sabre Office, not Sabre Office, but a sister organization to Sabre in Bosnia.
And my students at the department of librarianship will do all the process like field assessment, distribution, packing, packing receipts, keeping the records of the cargo as a part of their in-service training at the university.
So I will use that opportunity to teach them how to handle the groups.
And of course, I'm expecting a great deal not to be rich because it's worth an organization effort, but it has some kind of a different approach to the problem of the groups.
or to the problem of how to get life into the university community.
And then Harvard University Press promises that the history, in fact, two copies of all the books available.
And yesterday, when I was given things to you, you know, people came across to the warehouse of Siwa.
Do you see somebody watching?
Oh, they were in a, down called Berlin.
Berlin.
Berlin, yeah.
It looks like Berlin.
Yeah, Berlin.
It comes that there are some other university classes who will want to do the same kind of information.
That's wonderful.
Yeah, but he was surprised with the amount and the generous offer from, I think, Chicago or... I really don't know these... And that is wonderful.
Yes.
Sure.
So she did not know at the moment how to handle it.
She was quite nervous while we were back, while we were on our way from the warehouse to Cambridge.
So I just said, it's no problem.
You promised me six containers.
But if it's fruitful for your organization, spread the action.
So you will have the books.
I mean, you will have the real variety of the books we are talking here about.
more than 500 titles, but who knows how many copies.
If this can be useful for you as a Saber Foundation, use the opportunity.
I mean, here am I, first time in the United States and first address in the White House,
north western gate i mean i will have the problem if no one catch me at the airport but i was aware of that fact and i attended silly parts to all of my friends and i said please please please could you please wait me at the airport because of the funny thing that might happen if my airplane is late so i will have to take a cab in order to to be at the entrance uh age 15.
So I deleted the whole story stating, if not doing so, my email address will be camel at st.clinton.chism.gov.us.
So tell me, was Mrs. Clinton sympathetic to your situation?
Yes, absolutely.
I was surprised with the attitude.
She did my speech and pointed out that the importance of these, let's say, small projects, which are funded privately by various organizations.
I mean, this is not a job of governmental organizations, to talk with
a serious set of the very serious problems in Bosnia, like mine fields, for example.
You know, there is definitely, there are three million of the land mines.
Three million, sorry?
Three million.
Three million?
Yeah.
So practically, because the cleaning of the mine fields is quite inexpensive.
It might take 20 years.
Yeah.
It might take more.
Absolutely.
But between now and 20 years, since the culture is clean of the minds, there is something that must be done.
There is some kind of a program, we must take a practice.
So it is one small thing, one of the...
20 or 30 missing items on major streams of the growth of the country, I mean of the reconstruction of the country.
And that's Madeleine Albright, she's really a marvelous personality, a very wise person, with a magazine speech.
I don't know.
It goes very smoothly.
Some people believe myself that I was there, but I haven't heard of them.
Now, you're 40 years old, I think you told me, right?
Yeah.
When the fire happened, I was supposed to say you were 36.
Something like that.
So, whatever.
But for a young man,
Tell me what you felt when you started out in life as a professional person.
Did you think that at the age of 40 that this is what you're doing today?
No.
First of all, I have an enormous sense of guilt with my wife because I lied to her.
In fact, I lied to myself that this madness will be over in the 50 days.
50 days, yeah.
That is what I've done to my life.
Believe me, Marina, this will be ended in the 50 days.
And this is about when, when you're saying this?
I'd say April 1992.
Okay.
So I was wrong because before the war I was...
I was not a public person.
I didn't hold it just in the ministry.
I was just... Your life was books.
My life was books and I was some kind of a homegrown dinosaur.
My wife and the library... What is all about?
I spent endless hours in the library writing on my PhD thesis.
Where did you write?
On my PhD thesis.
And definitely...
take care of my life.
And the home.
I didn't read daily newspaper.
I wasn't able to politics, not part of the home or any party, you know.
You're a librarian.
I'm just a librarian.
And then the things happened the way they happened.
In fact, they dropped me.
They what?
They dropped me.
Well, they drafted you for the army.
Not for the area, thanks God for the Ministry of Defence.
But my job was also to take care of parts of the collections, military collections of documents and some portions of the library that could be in the city.
And after they just simply drafted me to the Ministry of Education to do what I was going to do.
So I joined the Ministry of Education in January 1994 when Hari Sarajis was elected to be a Prime Minister.
So we have a wonderful time and lots of time to discuss the key issue, what we're going to do.
in a more than desperate situation when your country is under total bankruptcy, when you have officially authority to take care, to maintain all the things which is under your auspicious, but you do not have the means to do this and to envisage some kind of a future of possible solutions.
So, it was quite an interesting episode of what I like.
More or less I'm
I learned a lot, that's the first thing.
And the second thing, we achieved a lot.
We achieved a lot because we were crazy enough to think strategically in the times of the war, which is not a good thing.
War is something that totally shakes all the structures.
What did you do your PhD on?
My PhD is very specific.
Basically, it's an information science, a simple field called bibliometrics.
I invented and I produced
Science citation index for the field of archaeology of Bosnia.
Just to get the exact numbers and figures and patterns, charts, maps, diagrams, what is the actual information flow in historical scientific science?
On the basis of this statistical result, I try to develop some kind of a political system, an expert system for the museum, meaning how to connect, how to link various information sources like library, like collections, like documentation, like
cadastres like maps into a system that will provide you sufficient information as a background reading before you go to the specific site to dig and what are your obligations after you did your digging as an archaeologist so you were pure scholar absolutely but unfortunately
I do not have the time and the need to continue my research in that area but in the meantime I discovered in my library and museum some manuscripts that are unknown to the public and I tried to
making some kind of a hobby.
I made some kind of a lucky lady.
Lucky lady.
And it's all prior to the catastrophe in 1992.
Maybe five days before all started in Sarajevo, I discovered a manuscript that was considered to be lost.
And that is an amazing story.
It's a Bosnian-Serbian author from the city of Moscow.
Mostar in Herzegovina.
So I retyped the whole manuscript in my computer and my wife always made complaints stating to whom are you typing this manuscript?
It's a Serbian author from the city of Mostar who is over, who is on the siege of the Croatian forces.
I said, maybe this war will be ended soon and it will be a hit.
Unknown drama, three acts, totally unknown manuscripts.
Accidentally I found it because it was folded in some other envelope.
That's a great story.
And how large is it, physically?
Physically, it's a normal free-act drama, 72 pages of a manuscript, practically less than 60 pages of a typescript.
What is the significance of it, would you say, historically?
Okay, a new volume to the complete volume of one of the most productive and most beautiful authors, Bosnian-Serbian authors.
Authors?
Yeah, writers.
This is for the tape, so when I can... Go ahead, I'm sorry.
So I added another volume to his complete volume.
And what's his name once more?
Svetozar Chorovic.
So you didn't tell me that.
How would I spell that?
S-V-E-T.
And I'll be able to find this too.
So this was a very significant find then, wasn't it?
Yes, but that happened.
week before it all started, but on the very same day.
This was a week before?
Yes, it was 1st of April, for example, and all started on 6th, April 6th, with those riots and demonstrations in front of the House of the Parliament and the first sniper shooting in the city.
But on the very day, this is also the tragic story, on the very day when all had happened, I was in the museum and discovered another set of the manuscripts.
These are the manuscripts of the folk songs from the First World War.
Really?
So like I was predicting that there would be another war.
Jeez, I just hit him.
That car just hit back.
So were these items saved or were they lost in the war?
No, no, I just took them to my place, did the retyping.
So they were saved?
Yeah, they were saved.
Because you took them home to retype them?
Yes, I just retyped them and then returned them to the museum.
But you know, if I search for these items for ten years, there is no way that I can find them.
But the silly thing that I had to evacuate all my collections, you know.
I had to pick all this stuff and, you know.
So tell me where you're going now.
We're at Harvard Square.
No, in any corner, it's a fine, wherever you can stop.
No, no, no, well, I'll just... I'm in Aurora Street.
It's 20 meters from here.
Are you sure?
On the Broadway.
Well, then just, I can take you to where you're going, so why don't I just... I'm sorry, just drop it here, I don't know.
Okay.
I'll just pull over.
Is this okay?
Yes.
You're sure?
Absolutely.
Right over here?
Yes, yes, sir.
Well, this has been such a great pleasure for me.
I'm sorry you weren't comfortable in the front seat.
And I'll be in touch, okay?
I'll send you some e-mail, and we'll communicate, and I'll come visit you.
Okay.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to talk to you, and thank you for the lunch.
Thank you.
Good luck.
Bye-bye.
...where you can put out a call and get one of...